Basic structure: hook, setup, inciting incident, journey into the unknown, investigation, twist, turning point, surprise crisis, final confrontation, climax, resolution.

ACT I

1. Hook: use one of the various techniques to suck readers/viewers in fast.


2. Setup: show the status-quo of the world. Perhaps introduce characters casually doing what they always do. Introduce the main character.


3. Enter Antagonist: the antagonist makes an entrance. Show their personality.


4. Supporting Characters: each of these characters will serve to highlight or contrast the main character’s personality.


5. Plot Goal (Want): Problem arises. The main goal of the protagonist is established.


6. Theme or Theme Goal Defined (need): shows in what ways the character needs to change by the end of the story to accomplish his goal. Highlight his weakness and flaws.


7. Gauntlet: protagonist conflict with the antagonist.


8. First Test: first big challenge. Protagonist may fail this (highlights their weakness).


9. Inciting Incident: Event that changes the status-quo.

 

ACT II


10. Exile: The journey into the unknown. Protagonist leaves his familiar world in order to accomplish his big goal.


11. Plot Goals Restated: protagonist questions whether he made the right choice by leaving his home or normal world.


12. Theme Goals Restated: start developing a theme. Use metaphors or symbols to tell about this theme.


13. McGuffin: a random, unforeseen event which pushes the plot forward. It shakes up the protagonist and causes him to stop stalling and thinking and gets him moving again.


14. Investigation: Protagonist fumbles around in dark to accomplish his goal. He is not sure of exactly what he needs to do and so is not exactly efficient.


15. Meet Mentor: Teacher, godlike force, wizard, or fully-realized hero appears and aids the protagonist.


16. Acquire New Tools: New skills, tools, or information is found or is given to the protagonist.


17. Joke: This is just a funny moment to relieve the tension. Shows the protagonist’s “Achilles heel.”


18. Foreshadow: Prepares the audience for the climax of the film. This should be fairly subtle.


19. Unique Genre Color: show something to do with the genre you’re writing in. For example, a dragon for Fantasy, of aliens for Sci-Fi. Whatever works fro your particular story.


20. First Theme Success: Show small growth in the protagonist that is related to the story’s theme and/or a small step in the direction of how the character needs to change by the end.


21. Triumph First Plot Success: 1st goal is accomplished (not the main goal, but a step towards it).


22. Betrayal: supporting characters act in treacherous way (possible twist), or the protagonist falls prey to his own weakness.


23. Big Bad Twist: an unexpected turn of events which often changes the big goal of the protagonist. What he thought he wanted isn’t actually what he needs and now he knows better.


24. Torture/Escape: Protagonist suffers greatly, but comes out of the challenge stronger. Sometimes gains or awakens new skills within himself.


25. Defeat: Protagonist is defeated. His plans didn’t work.


26. Reassess Plot Goal: Character reassess the situation and goes a new direction to achieve the plot goal.


27. Restate Theme Goal: return of symbolism that is a reminder of the story theme, or an event that shows that the character has grown even more.


28. Mentor Disabled: Protagonist must go forward alone because, for whatever reason, the mentor is no longer able to help.


29. Second Joke: another funny or playful moment.


30. Unique Genre Element: something recognizable to your genre. For example, in a sci-fi story: aliens, or a spaceship. For Fantasy: dragon or unicorns. Whatever works for your particular story.


31. Surrender: Protagonist vs. impossible odds. He may lose everything and give up.


32. McGuffin: Unexpected event or new information or gained powers moves plot forward, helps to kick the protagonist out of his rut.


33. New Solution: Unexpected solution is discovered. Now the protagonist goes for the goal with more vigor than before.

 

ACT III


34. Final Confrontation: tension between protagonist and antagonist rises. Antagonist is confronted.


35. Death: Protagonist (and his supporting characters) are defeated


36. Resurrection: protagonist gathers himself and charges at the antagonist a second time.


37. Sacrifice: the protagonist must make a considerable sacrifice in order to achieve his goal. He could lose a limb, or have to make a tough choice, such as choosing between getting a treasure and saving a team member.


38. Revelation: the theme is reiterated. Protagonist has an epiphany relating to it.


39. Climax: Protagonist finally wins.


40. Resolution: loose ends are wrapped up.
